README.rst, before:

fastKDE
=======

Software Overview
-----------------

fastKDE calculates a kernel density estimate of arbitrarily dimensioned
data; it does so rapidly and robustly using recently developed KDE
techniques. It does so with statistical skill that is as good as
state-of-the-science 'R' KDE packages, and it does so 10,000 times
faster for bivariate data (even better improvements for higher
dimensionality).

*Please cite the following papers when using this method:*

  `O’Brien, T. A., Kashinath, K., Cavanaugh, N. R., Collins, W. D. & O’Brien, J. P. A fast and objective multidimensional kernel density estimation method: fastKDE. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 101, 148–160 (2016). <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2016.02.014>`__

  `O’Brien, T. A., Collins, W. D., Rauscher, S. A. & Ringler, T. D. Reducing the computational cost of the ECF using a nuFFT: A fast and objective probability density estimation method. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 79, 222–234 (2014). <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2014.06.002>`__

Example usage:

For a standard PDF
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    #!python
     
    import numpy as np
    from fastkde import fastKDE
    import pylab as PP

    #Generate two random variables dataset (representing 100000 pairs of datapoints)
    N = 2e5
    var1 = 50*np.random.normal(size=N) + 0.1
    var2 = 0.01*np.random.normal(size=N) - 300
      
    #Do the self-consistent density estimate
    myPDF,axes = fastKDE.pdf(var1,var2)

    #Extract the axes from the axis list
    v1,v2 = axes

    #Plot contours of the PDF should be a set of concentric ellipsoids centered on
    #(0.1, -300) Comparitively, the y axis range should be tiny and the x axis range
    #should be large
    PP.contour(v1,v2,myPDF)
    PP.show()



For a conditional PDF
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following code generates samples from a non-trivial joint
distribution

.. code:: python

	from fastkde import fastKDE
	import pylab as PP
	import numpy as np

	#***************************
	# Generate random samples
	#***************************
	# Stochastically sample from the function underlyingFunction() (a sigmoid):
	# sample the absicissa values from a gamma distribution
	# relate the ordinate values to the sample absicissa values and add
	# noise from a normal distribution

	#Set the number of samples
	numSamples = int(1e6)

	#Define a sigmoid function
	def underlyingFunction(x,x0=305,y0=200,yrange=4):
	     return (yrange/2)*np.tanh(x-x0) + y0

	xp1,xp2,xmid = 5,2,305  #Set gamma distribution parameters
	yp1,yp2 = 0,12          #Set normal distribution parameters (mean and std)

	#Generate random samples of X from the gamma distribution
	x = -(np.random.gamma(xp1,xp2,int(numSamples))-xp1*xp2) + xmid
	#Generate random samples of y from x and add normally distributed noise
	y = underlyingFunction(x) + np.random.normal(loc=yp1,scale=yp2,size=numSamples)

**Now that we have the x,y samples, the following code calcuates the
conditional**

.. code:: python

    #***************************
    # Calculate the conditional
    #***************************
    pOfYGivenX,axes = fastKDE.conditional(y,x)

The following plot shows the results:

.. code:: python

    #***************************
    # Plot the conditional
    #***************************
    fig,axs = PP.subplots(1,2,figsize=(10,5))

    #Plot a scatter plot of the incoming data
    axs[0].plot(x,y,'k.',alpha=0.1)
    axs[0].set_title('Original (x,y) data')

    #Set axis labels
    for i in (0,1):
        axs[i].set_xlabel('x')
        axs[i].set_ylabel('y')

    #Draw a contour plot of the conditional
    axs[1].contourf(axes[0],axes[1],pOfYGivenX,64)
    #Overplot the original underlying relationship
    axs[1].plot(axes[0],underlyingFunction(axes[0]),linewidth=3,linestyle='--',alpha=0.5)
    axs[1].set_title('P(y|x)')

    #Set axis limits to be the same
    xlim = [np.amin(axes[0]),np.amax(axes[0])]
    ylim = [np.amin(axes[1]),np.amax(axes[1])]
    axs[1].set_xlim(xlim)
    axs[1].set_ylim(ylim)
    axs[0].set_xlim(xlim)
    axs[0].set_ylim(ylim)

    fig.tight_layout()

    PP.savefig('conditional_demo.png')
    PP.show()

.. figure:: conditional_demo.png
   :alt: Conditional PDF

   Conditional PDF

How do I get set up?
--------------------

A standard python build: ``python setup.py install``

or

``pip install fastkde``

Download the source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Please contact Travis A. O'Brien TAOBrien@lbl.gov to obtain the latest
version of the source.

Install pre-requisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This code requires the following software:

-  Python >= 2.7.3
-  Numpy >= 1.7
-  scipy
-  cython

Copyright Information
---------------------

::

    LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY
    RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT, NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY, LICENSE
     
    Copyright (c) 2015, The Regents of the University of California, through
    Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required
    approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy).  All rights reserved.
     
    Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
    modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
     
    (1) Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
     
    (2) Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
     
    (3) Neither the name of the University of California, Lawrence Berkeley
    National Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Energy nor the names of its contributors
    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
    without specific prior written permission.
     
    (4) Use of the software, in source or binary form is FOR RESEARCH
    & DEVELOPMENT, NON-COMMERCIAL USE, PURPOSES ONLY. All commercial use rights
    for the software are hereby reserved. A separate commercial use license is
    available from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

    (5) In the event you create any bug fixes, patches, upgrades, updates,
    modifications, derivative works or enhancements to the source code or
    binary code of the software ("Enhancements") you hereby grant The Regents of
    the University of California and the U.S. Government a paid-up,
    non-exclusive, irrevocable, worldwide license in the Enhancements to
    reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public,
    perform publicly and display publicly, and to permit others to do so.  THIS
    SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
    ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
    LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
    INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
    CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
    ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
    POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  *** Copyright Notice *** FastKDE v1.0,
    Copyright (c) 2015, The Regents of the University of California, through
    Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required
    approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy).  All rights reserved.
    If you have questions about your rights to use or distribute this software,
    please contact Berkeley Lab's Innovation & Partnerships Office at
    IPO@lbl.gov.
    NOTICE.  This software was developed under funding from the U.S. Department of Energy.  As such,
    the U.S. Government has been granted for itself and others acting on its
    behalf a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable, worldwide license in the
    Software to reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform publicly and
    display publicly.  Beginning five (5) years after the date permission to
    assert copyright is obtained from the U.S. Department of Energy, and
    subject to any subsequent five (5) year renewals, the U.S. Government is
    granted for itself and others acting on its behalf a paid-up, nonexclusive,
    irrevocable, worldwide license in the Software to reproduce, prepare
    derivative works, distribute copies to the public, perform publicly and
    display publicly, and to permit others to do so.
    ****************************

Commit message:

Add example for pdf_at_points

README.rst, after:

fastKDE
=======

Software Overview
-----------------

fastKDE calculates a kernel density estimate of arbitrarily dimensioned
data; it does so rapidly and robustly using recently developed KDE
techniques. It does so with statistical skill that is as good as
state-of-the-science 'R' KDE packages, and it does so 10,000 times
faster for bivariate data (even better improvements for higher
dimensionality).

*Please cite the following papers when using this method:*

  `O’Brien, T. A., Kashinath, K., Cavanaugh, N. R., Collins, W. D. & O’Brien, J. P. A fast and objective multidimensional kernel density estimation method: fastKDE. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 101, 148–160 (2016). <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2016.02.014>`__

  `O’Brien, T. A., Collins, W. D., Rauscher, S. A. & Ringler, T. D. Reducing the computational cost of the ECF using a nuFFT: A fast and objective probability density estimation method. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 79, 222–234 (2014). <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2014.06.002>`__

Example usage:

For a standard PDF
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    from fastkde import fastKDE
    import pylab as PP

    #Generate two random variables dataset (representing 100000 pairs of datapoints)
    N = 2e5
    var1 = 50*np.random.normal(size=N) + 0.1
    var2 = 0.01*np.random.normal(size=N) - 300

    #Do the self-consistent density estimate
    myPDF,axes = fastKDE.pdf(var1,var2)

    #Extract the axes from the axis list
    v1,v2 = axes

    #Plot contours of the PDF should be a set of concentric ellipsoids centered on
    #(0.1, -300) Comparitively, the y axis range should be tiny and the x axis range
    #should be large
    PP.contour(v1,v2,myPDF)
    PP.show()



For a conditional PDF
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following code generates samples from a non-trivial joint
distribution

.. code:: python

	from fastkde import fastKDE
	import pylab as PP
	import numpy as np

	#***************************
	# Generate random samples
	#***************************
	# Stochastically sample from the function underlyingFunction() (a sigmoid):
	# sample the absicissa values from a gamma distribution
	# relate the ordinate values to the sample absicissa values and add
	# noise from a normal distribution

	#Set the number of samples
	numSamples = int(1e6)

	#Define a sigmoid function
	def underlyingFunction(x,x0=305,y0=200,yrange=4):
	     return (yrange/2)*np.tanh(x-x0) + y0

	xp1,xp2,xmid = 5,2,305  #Set gamma distribution parameters
	yp1,yp2 = 0,12          #Set normal distribution parameters (mean and std)

	#Generate random samples of X from the gamma distribution
	x = -(np.random.gamma(xp1,xp2,int(numSamples))-xp1*xp2) + xmid
	#Generate random samples of y from x and add normally distributed noise
	y = underlyingFunction(x) + np.random.normal(loc=yp1,scale=yp2,size=numSamples)

**Now that we have the x,y samples, the following code calculates the
conditional**

.. code:: python

    #***************************
    # Calculate the conditional
    #***************************
    pOfYGivenX,axes = fastKDE.conditional(y,x)

The following plot shows the results:

.. code:: python

    #***************************
    # Plot the conditional
    #***************************
    fig,axs = PP.subplots(1,2,figsize=(10,5))

    #Plot a scatter plot of the incoming data
    axs[0].plot(x,y,'k.',alpha=0.1)
    axs[0].set_title('Original (x,y) data')

    #Set axis labels
    for i in (0,1):
        axs[i].set_xlabel('x')
        axs[i].set_ylabel('y')

    #Draw a contour plot of the conditional
    axs[1].contourf(axes[0],axes[1],pOfYGivenX,64)
    #Overplot the original underlying relationship
    axs[1].plot(axes[0],underlyingFunction(axes[0]),linewidth=3,linestyle='--',alpha=0.5)
    axs[1].set_title('P(y|x)')

    #Set axis limits to be the same
    xlim = [np.amin(axes[0]),np.amax(axes[0])]
    ylim = [np.amin(axes[1]),np.amax(axes[1])]
    axs[1].set_xlim(xlim)
    axs[1].set_ylim(ylim)
    axs[0].set_xlim(xlim)
    axs[0].set_ylim(ylim)

    fig.tight_layout()

    PP.savefig('conditional_demo.png')
    PP.show()

.. figure:: conditional_demo.png
   :alt: Conditional PDF

   Conditional PDF


Kernel Density Estimate for Specific Points
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To see the KDE values at specified points (not necessarily those that were used to generate the KDE):

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    from fastkde import fastKDE

    train_x = 50*np.random.normal(size=100) + 0.1
    train_y = 0.01*np.random.normal(size=100) - 300

    test_x = 50*np.random.normal(size=100) + 0.1
    test_y = 0.01*np.random.normal(size=100) - 300

    test_points = list(zip(test_x, test_y))
    test_point_pdf_values = fastKDE.pdf_at_points(train_x, train_y, list_of_points = test_points)


How do I get set up?
--------------------

A standard python build: ``python setup.py install``

or

``pip install fastkde``

Download the source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Please contact Travis A. O'Brien TAOBrien@lbl.gov to obtain the latest
version of the source.

Install pre-requisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This code requires the following software:

-  Python >= 2.7.3
-  Numpy >= 1.7
-  scipy
-  cython

Copyright Information
---------------------

::

    LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY
    RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT, NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY, LICENSE

    Copyright (c) 2015, The Regents of the University of California, through
    Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required
    approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy).  All rights reserved.

    Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
    modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

    (1) Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

    (2) Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

    (3) Neither the name of the University of California, Lawrence Berkeley
    National Laboratory, U.S. Dept. of Energy nor the names of its contributors
    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
    without specific prior written permission.

    (4) Use of the software, in source or binary form is FOR RESEARCH
    & DEVELOPMENT, NON-COMMERCIAL USE, PURPOSES ONLY. All commercial use rights
    for the software are hereby reserved. A separate commercial use license is
    available from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

    (5) In the event you create any bug fixes, patches, upgrades, updates,
    modifications, derivative works or enhancements to the source code or
    binary code of the software ("Enhancements") you hereby grant The Regents of
    the University of California and the U.S. Government a paid-up,
    non-exclusive, irrevocable, worldwide license in the Enhancements to
    reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public,
    perform publicly and display publicly, and to permit others to do so.  THIS
    SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
    ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
    LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
    INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
    CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
    ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
    POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  *** Copyright Notice *** FastKDE v1.0,
    Copyright (c) 2015, The Regents of the University of California, through
    Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (subject to receipt of any required
    approvals from the U.S. Dept. of Energy).  All rights reserved.
    If you have questions about your rights to use or distribute this software,
    please contact Berkeley Lab's Innovation & Partnerships Office at
    IPO@lbl.gov.
    NOTICE.  This software was developed under funding from the U.S. Department of Energy.  As such,
    the U.S. Government has been granted for itself and others acting on its
    behalf a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable, worldwide license in the
    Software to reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform publicly and
    display publicly.  Beginning five (5) years after the date permission to
    assert copyright is obtained from the U.S. Department of Energy, and
    subject to any subsequent five (5) year renewals, the U.S. Government is
    granted for itself and others acting on its behalf a paid-up, nonexclusive,
    irrevocable, worldwide license in the Software to reproduce, prepare
    derivative works, distribute copies to the public, perform publicly and
    display publicly, and to permit others to do so.
    ****************************
